Understanding the biology that defines basic mechanisms
of response to environmental stressors and the implications for human health
 
Fundamental research investigates the basic biological processes of how our bodies function, and of the pathways and systems that are susceptible to the effects of environmental stressors. This research addresses all levels of biological organization — molecular, biochemical pathway, cellular, tissue, organ, model organism, human, and population — and builds on the knowledge from new tools and techniques that allow us to ask more in-depth questions about the effects of our environment on biological systems.
These new research questions arise from our expanding knowledge of the genome, epigenome, and regulation of gene expression, and appreciation of direct effects
of stressors on cells that do not involve genomic targets. They call for systems and computational approaches, and recognition of the importance of changes in sensitivity to environmental stressors at different life stages, e.g., prenatal, pregnancy, old age.
Environmental agents can have direct toxicities and can also influence biological processes
 
that affect susceptibility to other agents. The study of biological systems in response to specific environmental agents represents an area of overlap with Theme 2. The research under this theme and Theme 2 can be thought of as the fundamental knowledge base of prevention science for environmental health, because understanding the mechanisms of disease will help us reduce the incidence of disease and mortality in susceptible populations. Through this research, we hope to create a foundation that will enable us to better understand the links between exposures and disease.
Contributions from epidemiology and population biology studies are a critical component of Theme 1. Observational population-based research provides the real-world reflection of the questions being asked by laboratory science and, in turn, can provide observations that can generate the need for mechanistic understanding. Sometimes, relationships are only evident as a result of looking at exposures and health outcomes together in a population setting. At the same time, interdisciplinary, integrative, and collaborative approaches are necessary. For example, we need to develop better tools for data integration, systems, and computational biology. We must also leverage existing human cohort studies with well-characterized exposure and health information to address the role of environmental exposures in disease etiology.
 
