Research to understand environmental contributors to global health and health disparities
 
NIEHS has been a leader in studying health risks associated with environmental toxicants and other stressors borne by vulnerable populations where they live, work, and play.
NIEHS has invested heavily in building capacity of affected communities to partner with environmental health scientists in order to study environmental concerns. It has long been recognized that individuals and communities that are socioeconomically disadvantaged also tend to suffer inequalities in both health and environmental burdens. It is also known that characteristics such as age, gender, and occupation can be factors in vulnerability.
Theme 4 incorporates aspects of all the other themes: fundamental research, exposure research, translational science, training and education, and communications and engagement.
 

Under this theme, NIEHS endeavors to support environmental justice research, by defining the environmental factors and their complex interactions that contribute to environmental health disparities, and by studying chemical and nonchemical stressors at the community level. This research includes developing new approaches to community-based research, fostering collaborations between community groups and research groups, establishing training programs for environmental health disparities research, and capacity building within institutions well placed to undertake health disparities research. For environmental health disparities research, it is necessary to incorporate social and behavioral aspects, as well as implications of environmental exposures into the research.
Environmental exposures of widespread public health significance occur throughout the world — many disproportionately affect not only the disadvantaged in our country but also the developing world. Populations around the world will continue to be a focus of NIEHS research. Taking a global environmental health focus includes opportunities to perform research
to learn about risks from widespread exposures. For example, increasing changes in global climate are expected to result in changes to weather, ecosystems, water supplies, and other aspects of our physical environment. These changes, and the mitigation and adaptation efforts that accompany them, will have implications for emerging environmental exposures,
especially affecting vulnerable populations. Environmental exposures are also major contributors to the worldwide increase in chronic, noncommunicable diseases and their effect on health and economic costs.
An additional component of this theme that intersects with Theme 3 is the development of new tools and approaches that will help us understand the economic impacts of environmental health risks, decisions, and policies. The field of health disparities research can benefit greatly from the contributions of cost-benefit analyses and comparative effectiveness research. Developing quantitative approaches that can be linked to economic impact is an important capability that can be used to inform decision-making in ways that will disproportionally benefit exposed communities.
As with all the themes, implementation of the goals under this theme will depend on wide-ranging and effective partnerships and collaborations. This requirement points to the need for good relationships between community groups, their leaders and representatives, and the invested researchers. Internationally, the collaborations extend also to foreign scientists and governments.
