Transdisciplinary environmental health science to inform individual, clinical, and public health decision-making
to improve health
 
Research that moves a basic science observation into a public health or medical application is sometimes termed translational science. Translational science is Theme 3, in recognition of the fact that our research priorities must include this kind of applied, outcome-oriented research, for us to ensure that the full benefit of all of our research investments can be realized as part of public health, medical, regulatory, and individual practice. This theme
embraces broad, interdisciplinary approaches — molecule to cell to model organism to human to society and back again, as informed by public health imperatives.
While translational approaches in medical research are sometimes referred to as bench-to- bedside, NIEHS research results in much broader applications, which have in common
an emphasis on preventing adverse health consequences from environmental exposure. NIEHS research moves through multiple translational pathways, not just to the bedside,
but to the community, to individual behaviors and choices, and to wider public policy changes and public health practice.
 

Predictive toxicology is one key component of this theme. The overall goal for the Tox21 program is to take observations obtained from the study of biological pathways and deploy them in a new framework, to provide specific information for making decisions about risk.
Environmental health translational science has been underutilized in the context of state-of-the-art medical practice.
In the paradigm known as personalized medicine, biomedical researchers are giving providers the tools to use genomic information to make better individual decisions about diagnosis and treatment that are tailored to the biology of the specific patient. Knowledge of environmental exposure needs to be incorporated into this decision-making framework.
Environmental health translational research can introduce, into medical decision-making, a new level of information about gene-environment interactions affecting drugs, biologics, infections, and other environmental factors in health and disease.
One important component of this theme is to enhance NIEHS use of metrics of comparative effectiveness in environmental health to inform health economics. A key need in this area is to develop tools and methods to evaluate the impact of environmental health research, including contributions to prevention of disease, that is systematic and transparent.
For more information on the Tox21 program, visit http://ntp.niehs.nih.gov/go/tox21 and search for Tox 21.
